Manuscript EJP-105403
Reply to referees


- REFEREE 2:

I cordially thank the Referee for the kind words about this manuscript, and
for the liberal and generous attitude toward my writing style (I must say,
in my experience this is a statistically rare attitude).

The Introduction of the manuscript was somewhat repetitive, and I thought
that an introductory self-explaining example of dimensional analysis in a
2D case could be useful. So I slightly modified the first three sections of
manuscript. I'd be happy to hear the Referee's comments and suggestions
about these modifications.



- REFEREE 3:

I thank the Referee for pointing out Kitano's work. Here are my replies to
the individual points:


1. Please note that S is the dimension of the *parameter* of the curve, not
of the curve itself, in particular not of its image (range). I believe this
is clearly stated in sect. 7, also mathematically, since it's written
dim(s)=S, not dim(C)=S.

I was at first surprised that the dimension of a curve's parameter affects
the dimension of its tangent vector. But a dimensional analysis of the very
definition of tangent vector (eqn 24 in the new version) shows that this is
indeed the case. I'd be happy to know if the Referee finds any wrong
mathematical steps there.

But on second thought this result is not so unexpected. The definition of
tangent vector depends crucially on the parameterization of the curve which
may represent it. Two curves with the same image may correspond to two
different tangent vectors. So it is not unreasonable that a change in the
parameter's dimension affects the dimension of the tangent vector.

The situation is different for chains. The value of the integral of a form
over a chain does not depend on the parameterization of the chain; it
depends only on the image. Some texts in fact define a chain as an
equivalence class based on identity of the images; see eg Martin (2004) and
Fecko (2006), now cited in the manuscript. So it is not unreasonable that
the dimension of a chain's parameterization should not enter the dimension
of the value of the integral.

A deeper reason is that the integral over a chain is ultimately defined in
terms of the standard integral on the real line. The dimension of a
standard integral on the real line

\int_M f(x) dx

traditionally is the same as the dimension of f(x)dx. The definition of the
Riemann integral makes clear why. Yet, maybe this can be considered as a
convention, and different conventions could be consistently used. But the
purpose of my manuscript is not to explore possible alternative
conventions. (I only do that for the dimension of the metric tensor,
because some historically important authors have used T^2 instead of L^2,
as discussed in section 9.)

The rule for the integral as given in the previous version of the
manuscript was somewhat dogmatic and unclear, however. I have now added an
explanation and given some references.


2. I had read Kitano's work, but probably skipped the final section, where
that quote appears. That work is now mentioned in the Introduction as an
example of text that's explicit about tensor components. Please see the new
Introduction. (Note that the formatting of citations is not definitive, and
up to the Journal's typographers.)

Several recent works that develop dimensional analysis in different
directions are also cited in the new version. Please see the references at
the end of the final section of the revised version.

The scope of the cited literature is different and vaster: the epistemological
meaning of "dimension" and its possible definitions, the deeper reasons
behind the usual rules of dimensional analysis, and so on. That literature
explores new results.

The purpose of my manuscript is pedagogical instead - that's why I
submitted it to the European Journal of Physics, which publishes
pedagogical works. There is no real novel material. As stated in the
Abstract and in the Introduction, everything is based on the works of
Schouten & Dorgelo and Truesdell & Toupin, cited there, and I hope to draw
attention to those works. I'm not aware of any recent literature that
explicitly addresses dimensional analysis for tensor bundles, Lie
derivative, connection and covariant derivative, curvature, etc. (or that
discusses or cites Schouten's "absolute" dimension of a tensor). Kitano's
is the only work I've seen, but he only devotes one short paragraph to
tensors, and only in the final section. Maybe authors of relativity and
differential-geometry texts believe that such analysis is self-evident, but
my experience with students shows that it isn't.

I have now rephrased Introduction and Abstract, stating that I'm offering a
guide to dimensional analysis in general relativity, especially to
students.


3. The expression "Riemann curvature tensor" is now used, at least when
first encountered.


4. In the revised version this definition is given in section 2, p. 5, and
separated from the main text to make it more visible. Section 2 now also
gives a lengthy motivation for this unusual notation; please see pages 4-5.
This operation can be defined independently of coordinates as, for example,

A^{T12}(u,v,w,...) := A(v,u,w,...)

so I believe no reference to vector and covector bases is needed.
